# Resampling
## Context

Let the discrete time signal $x_1[n]$ be the samples of a continuous time signal $x(t)$ sampled at some interval $T_1$:

$$
x_1[n] = x(t - n \cdot \frac{1}{T_1})
$$

We want to convert $x_1[n]$ to $x_2[n]$, where $x_2[n]$ is the samples of $x(t)$, but sampled at a different interval $T_2$.

Here we assume $\frac{T_1}{T_2}$ is rational, in other words, there exists some integer $L$ and $M$ that

$$
\frac{T_1}{T_2} = \frac{L}{M}
$$

For example, we may want to convert a WAV data of 44100Hz sampling rate to 48000Hz sampling rate.

## Problem
How do we convert $x_1[n]$ to $x_2[n]$?

## Solution
This resampling problem can be solved by two steps

1. Upsample $x_1[n]$ by the integer factor $L$
2. Downsample the outcome of the previous step by the integer factor $M$

### Upsampling

Upsampling is typically done by two steps

1. Create a zero-inserted sequence from the original signal
2. Smooth out the discontinuities with a lowpass filter. This filter is sometimes referred to as the _interpolation filter_

Let the zero-inserted sequence be $x_{1,L}[n]$, where

$$

x_{1,L}[n] = \left\{
  \begin{array}{cc}
    x_1[m] & m = \frac{n}{L} \\
    0 & otherwise
  \end{array}
  \right.
$$

Let $X(f)$ be the Fourier transform of $x(t)$. The discrete-time Fourier transform of $x_{1,L}[n]$ and $x_1[n]$ are basically identical, for both of them are essentially

$$
\sum_n{ x(nT_1) e^{j 2 \pi f nT_1}  } = \frac{1}{T_1} \sum_k{ X(f - \frac{k}{T_1} })
$$

However, the true "upsampled by factor $L$" signal should be of DTFT

$$
\frac{L}{T_1} \sum_k{ X(f - \frac{kL}{T_1} })
$$

If $x(t)$ is band-limited, of bandwidth $W < \frac{0.5}{T_1}$, then we can design an ideal low-pass filter (LPF) of cut-off frequency $\frac{0.5}{T_1}$, and filter $x_{1,L}[n]$ with this LPF. The DTFT of the filtered $x_{1,L}[n]$ will be $\frac{L}{T_1} \sum_k{ X(f - \frac{kL}{T_1} })$ as desired.

### Downsampling

Downsampling is typically done by two steps

1. Apply an anti-aliasing low-pass filter to the original signal
2. Decimate the filtered signal by a integer factor M.

### Combining Upsampling and Downsampling

The overall data flow can be described as follows

```
x1[n] ---> zero-insertion ---> interpolation filter h[n] ---> anti-aliasing filter f[n] ---> decimation ---> x2[n]
                         x1,L[n]   \                                              /     y[n]
                                    -----------------------v----------------------
                                                           g[n]
```

The interpolation filter $h[n]$ and the anti-aliasing filter $f[n]$ can be combined into one filter $g[n]$ to reduce the computation.

First, zero-pad $g[n]$ so that its length becomes a multiple of $L$. Here we assume the length of the zero-padded $g[n]$ is $qL$, where $q$ is an positive integer.

Let $y[n]$ be the output of $g[n]$, then

$$
\begin{align}
y[n] &= x_{1,L}[n] * g[n] \\
 &= \sum_{k=0}^{qL-1}( x_{1,L}[n-k]g[k] ) \\
\end{align}
$$

Because $x_{1,L}[n-k]=0$ when $(n-k)$ is not multiple of $L$, we can rewrite $y[n]$ as

$$
\begin{align}
y[n]  &=  \left\{
  \begin{array}{cc}
    \sum_{j=0}^{q-1}x_1[\frac{n}{L}-j] \cdot g[L \cdot j] & \mod(n,L)=0 \\
    \sum_{j=0}^{q-1}x_1[\frac{n-1}{L}-j] \cdot g[L \cdot j + 1] & \mod(n,L)=1 \\
    \vdots \\
    \sum_{j=0}^{q-1}x_1[\frac{n-(L-1)}{L}-j] \cdot g[L \cdot j + L-1] & \mod(n,L)=L-1 \\
  \end{array}
  \right.
\end{align}
$$

Following table illustrates the computation of $y[n]$:

|       |       |       |     |         |         |         |     |         |         |         |     |         |                                           |
|------ |------ |------ |-----|-------- |-------- |-------- |-----|-------  |---------|---------|-----|---------|-------------------------------------------|
| g[0]  | g[1]  | g[2]  | ... | g[L]    | g[L+1]  | g[L+2]  | ... | g[2L]   | g[2L+1] | g[2L+2] | ... | g[qL-1] |                                           |
| x1[q] | 0     | 0     | ... | x1[q-1] | 0       | 0       | ... | x1[q-2] | 0       | 0       | ... | 0       | y[qL] = x1[q]g[0] + x1[q-1]g[L] + ...     |
| 0     | x1[q] | 0     | ... | 0       | x1[q-1] | 0       | ... | 0       | x1[q-2] | 0       | ... | 0       | y[qL+1] = x1[q]g[1] + x1[q-1]g[L+1] + ... |
| 0     | 0     | x1[q] | ... | 0       | 0       | x1[q-1] | ... | 0       | 0       | x1[q-2] | ... | 0       | y[qL+2] = x1[q]g[2] + x1[q-1]g[L+2] + ... |


Note that the computation of $y[n]$ above can be viewed as $x_1[n]$ filtered by a filter bank $\{g_0[n], g_1[n], g_2[n], ... , g_{L-1}[n] \}$ where

$$
g_i[n] = \{g[0+i], g[L+i], g[2L+i], ... g[(q-1)L+i]\}
$$

This filter bank is called the _polyphase filter_.

With the "polyphase filter" approach, computing one sample of $y[n]$ requires only $q$ multiplications and $q-1$ additions (instead of $qL$ multiplications and $qL-1$ additions as the typical convolution requires). Also, only 1 out of $M$ samples of $y[n]$ needs to be computed because the rest will be decimated anyway. 